Final Faillog
STEP 0 – CHOOSING PROJECT AND OBTAINING DATA 
Chose to make my own digital history work, from the 14th Canadian Hospital War Diaries database
http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/pam_archives/index.php?fuseaction=genitem.displayItem&lang=eng&rec_nbr=2005110&rec_nbr_list=3366167,
3203123,2005097,2005100,2005101,2005099,2005096,2005110,2005108,2005106
Data from both 10th Canadian Stationary Hospital and the 14th Canadian General Hospital
From cursory reading of the image files, something that caught my eye was nurses on leave
Seemingly quite rare
Perhaps by analyzing when nurses were on leave, better idea of the life of Canadian nurses during the first world war
Background reading, difference between types of hospitals (conditions varied)
https://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/military-heritage/first-world-war/canada-nursing-sisters/Pages/caregiving-on-the-front.aspx#f
Stationary and general hospitals did different work than field hospitals, different conditions
I found on zulip that other students (Lauren Rollit, Amanda Ngan and Alexei Tipenko) had already transcribed the diaries to .txt format. Shoutout to them for doing all that work cleaning up!
https://github.com/laurenrollit/hist3814o-final-project
Downloaded text files from github as a zip folder and extracted it

STEP 1 – ANALYSIS WITH ANTCONC
Because they were all separate files, the first program that came to mind to sift through it was AntConc
http://www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc/
Makes it very easy to search for specific words from multiple documents
Click File > Open Directory to import the entire folder of .txt documents
Search for leave by typing in “?eave” in word search bar (? allows the letter to be replaced by any single character, in this case so 
both capital and lower case “leave” would show up
Under concordance tab lists every single incident of the word leave
Got 34 hits from both nurses and officers
I increased the search window size to show more context (aka the full entries)
Helpfully also displays which file each hit came from, useful for information only provided at top of page (like what hospital the 
entry is from) 
The Concordance Plot tab provides more information on this, displaying how many hits each page had and where they were on the 
document

STEP 2 -  INPUTTING TO EXCEL
Now it was time to format data for further analysis in other programs
Due to the relatively low number of hits, I decided to input the exact data I wanted manually into a spreadsheet using Excel 
(apologies for giving in to Microsoft, but I learned in the previous modules that the better excel replacement did not work on my 
computer)
The reason for this is because with so few hits in 80 pages, it is more time effective to add to a new document rather than use regex 
or something to take away everything else
Also in the interest of consistency, since from AntConc I found the exact sentence structure varied, the amount of information given 
varied
This way I could input the exact data I wanted in the same format every time, and omit when necessary
Basically, since the data was so small I had the means to make as close as I could to a “Dream Case” spreadsheet
I wanted to focus on the lives of the nurses themselves and not the officers, so I made the decision to omit any data about the 
officers
I also chose to omit entries at the end that only listed the number of nurses on leave at that moment, although I saved that data 
separately for further analysis and comparison for later
I also made the decision to input two nurses going on leave at the same time as separate entries, but mark them with an asterisk for 
further analysis
Now, the important thing was to figure out what data I wanted to find
I decided on the following tabs:
FILE (for my own organization)
ENTRY DATE 
HOSPITAL
NAME (of nurse)
START DATE
END DATE
DAYS (number)
REASON (if given)

I then inputted the data manually as displayed in AntConc
Should note that I had to make sure the dates tab entered as text or else excel would automatically try to change them to incorrect 
dates (ie, 12/2/17 or February 12th, 1917 would be automatically turned into December 2, 2017 ).  Accomplished this by following
tutorial here
https://support.office.com/en-us/article/stop-automatically-changing-numbers-to-dates-452bd2db-cc96-47d1-81e4-72cec11c4ed8
As I went on, I decided the need for another category…
MULTIPLE (how many nurses left on leave the same time, yes or no then number)
… Since I found so many nurses went on leave at the same time. This would allow me to analyze how many went on leave together and how 
frequently
I also added:
HIT (number)
So that I could keep track of the hit number as it corresponded to AntConc. This was mainly so I wouldn’t miss any data, but also so I 
could tell which nurses were linked in the same entry easier
I also deleted the “REASON” column since so few were given reasons, it would result in a lot of empty cells
After inputting this data from AntConc, I decided to find a calendar for 1917 in order to not only calculate days on leave but the 
weekdays they fell upon as well
https://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/?year=1917&country=27
A couple things of note I found interesting. For one, although the days of the week in which they left changed, for the first half of 
the data sets almost all leaves fell as full weeks (ex Sunday to Sunday), usually for 2 weeks at a time
However, halfway through, leaves take a sudden change to being mostly 17 days in length. 
In addition, the missing dates of entry were all in 1918. Apparently, the turn of the year brought a change in note taking style
I then went through some documents in the original archive in order to confirm  couple of empty date cells (The cleaned pages start 
at 8029, so to find the corresponding archive image one has to subtract 8029)
This revealed that the logs actually became quite late in February, before being caught up in April

STEP 3 – CHECK DATA WITH OPEN REFINE
Now that my data is inputted, I’m going to double check for any errors with OpenRefine
http://openrefine.org/
The first thing I do is convert the names column to a text facet, like we did in class (Click the column header > Facet > Text Facet). 
I then clicked Cluster on the left sidebar in order to check for any inconsistent names
Ends up there was! O.K. Ismay was entered under both upper and lowercase in the log. To fix this, I selected “Merge Selected & 
Re-Cluster”
Tada! No more entries to cluster. However, I then double checked my entries for other names entered in lowercase and found one 
(M. Tait) and edited the cell to (M. TAIT) for consistency
I now sorted the names by count (aka how frequently they appeared) and found that only three nurses took more than one leave of 
absence over the year. Interesting! Although this does not necessarily mean they took the most days leave. I will look at this later….
For now, analyzing columns one by one. I deleted the “HIT” column as I no longer need to refer to the AntConc data placement 
(and this would only confuse those viewing the project). 
I then turned the multiple column into a text facet and counted, which revealed that 10 nurses went on leave alone, 10 went on leave 
at the same time as one other nurse, and only 6 went on leave at the same time as two other nurses.
To me, the frequency of taking leaves in groups seems evident that leave was highly regulated and not personalized in nature (aka, 
you got leave when you got leave, not when you requested it). 
Next I analyzed the files in which nurses leave was taken. 
Leave of nurses was only mentioned in 9 files out of 80, meaning leave was either very infrequent or not always recorded.  Within the
files mentioned, the average number of nurses on leave mentioned was 2.8. This is likely a result of either the nurses being given 
leave in groups, or perhaps only certain logs bothering to mention leave at all. 
I couldn’t figure out how to get the timeline facet to work so I skipped the date section for now, but I did analyze both the starting
and ending days of the week for leave.  Although Monday was most common for both (and Wed overall least common) there was less of a 
pattern than I expected considering the regimented nature of leave. Perhaps this is due to the frequency of 17 day leaves in the later 
part of the year.
For the number of days column,  I tried to get OpenRefine to recognize the numbers as numbers by following this guide 
(https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Faceting) but somehow I only got errors. However, the most important thing to check in 
open refine was the frequency of each occurrence, which I was able to do in text facets anyways. 
As predicted, 14 day leaves were by far the most popular, followed by the odd 17 day leaves. After this 3 week (21 day) and 1 week (7) 
day leaves were frequent, followed by other day amounts (likely leaves due to special circumstances). 
Update: I have now figured out how to transform the days to number! Ends up all I had to do was click on the header>Edit Cells > 
Common Transformations > to number. Hooray! I now have a graph plotting the numbers values
I tried doing this to the dates column too but, of course, it sent it to 2017 and screwed up the format (since it was written in 
date/month/year instead of month/date/year)
Ends up undoing things is harder than it looks, the tab shows everything that has been done but not how to undo it.
Figured it out thanks to this tutorial (https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/History) all you have to do is click on the 
revious state! Very useful
Now all I have to do is delete the extra column at the end and export for further transformations!
Exported! Now to visualize the data and present it on my blog


STEP 4 – VISUALIZE IN WORDPRESS
Now the question is how to visualize the data I found
My first thought was to try to put it into a calendar in order to display when each nurse went on leave
I went back to time and date in order to make a custom calendar
https://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/custommenu.html
However, while it was easy to create a blank calendar for 1917-1918, making one with custom events was pretty much impossible
You’d have to click back 100 times (since of course it automatically makes events for 2018) for every single instance of leave and 
could only make 1 year (not require year and a half).
So  I decided to move on. 
My next thought was to use a wordpress plugin calendar, as that would not only display the data but potentially make it interactive.
However, all the calendars I could find only posted current and future events, not really what I was looking for.
I downloaded a history timeline plugin, but not only was it confusing but didn’t display my data very well.
Finally, I had the idea to use graphs and charts of the data analysis I did using OpenRefine in a wordpress plugin to more seamlessly 
present my ideas
Used Visualizer Lite to create graphs and charts
https://wordpress.org/plugins/visualizer/

Of course, manually entering data was for pro edition only
So have to reformat data from openrefine in excel using csv format
Then you just have to import it and it’ll automatically make a graph for you!
Decided to make vizualizations for the following
Days on Leave (bar chart)
Leaves by Month
Days Of Week Leave Starts
Days Of Week Leave Ends
# of Days each Nurse was on Leave (Column chart)
Number of Nurses on Leave Together (Bar Chart)
Now just a matter of writing it!
